Yeah, so you're having, you have this
movement and you can hear very well when
you open and it's just your, you don't
think about your step, they're just tired
the legs, so they're you're deep and you
walk with your chest. So for me it's like
you are walking like this, walking here.
here, then we have this movement, this
one, over,
hold circle to here, and then through the
back, through the back, here, and then
quick up, and again down, quick up, and
down, Oh yeah, and then you have your
accent, so you do again this one.
Okay. Yeah, and then it tells you to stop
anyway. Marking maybe from this part.
So from the music, we like just like let's
learn the music. I think, Matthias, when
we're...
Okay, okay. This is with the steps also,
no? This one is still with the, like with
the raw, still like with the raw. And
step, step, so it's a kind of step, step,
yes, it's only in small, but the rhythm,
but the feet stay.
Then from here, you
go in this direction, you have a small
attitude, leg, leg, arm, arm, this, again
this movement, Till you have an attitude,
then you have this what the men do before,
this, this, cut, passe, passe soutenu,
till here, big raw to the floor, on the
knee, yeah, all the way to the, yes, like
that turn around very low and then very
very front and one yes big fall and then
you push back and you go again into this
movement one. This, this, this, arm, arm.
Here we won't have time really. And then
comes turn, turn, Hop, step, step. Yes,
yeah. So, yeah.
Then you have to go a little bit backwards
again to the foot, otherwise you are
traveling too far. So you go always like
it stays on the spot, yes. But not, not,
not, the steps are not too big. the step
is not too big yeah yeah
okay okay yes
whatever
from the attitude you know where we ended
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, okay.
Also...
© BF-WATCH TV 2021
but we're coming soon to the end anyway
marking again just but mark really you
know it's it's hard fernando
Yeah, come a bit more forward. No, my
reserve is still a bit.
© BF-WATCH TV 2021
Okay, okay, okay, okay. Now with this new
music, you're having a parallel jump in
contraction. You're having the arms like
this in the jump. It's fist, actually
fist, no?
Yeah, this, then it's like very fast. It's
the turn, this, you turn, but this goes
into, you turn like this, but this goes
into this movement.
You jump like this, you jump here. then
you start the turn like this and from here
you already touch it again you meet and
you go into this movement this into the
move and then you will be interrupted and
you do another one i'm sorry i'm sorry i
mixed it up with the second time yes oh
sorry I mix it up with the second time. So
again, so you have this, you turn into
this and it comes here, down and up. go
into this and open and down and very quick
up you're done either way up and a little
bit of this woman and then it's just like
you just have no energy just on the knees
they collapse and then And then just ploof
and back.
And actually, well anyway, that routine is
before actually.
And then goes the whole diagonal. Jump,
accent, accent.
Then actually you're over there, very far.
I speak here anyway. So you are, then
comes again this one with this movement
but without the turn. You do jump again.
It goes into this movement and the music
will interrupt you. So we have to kind of
do another one. So and to the hands, to
the face.
Yes, and then it's this music where it
happened to you. You have to continue.
Yes, it's like, yes. You go kind of
middle. Yeah.
up
and then the last one is a mixture out of
this movement and out of this moment the
very quick ones on the end so where do we
start from
Music like? It's easier with music, the
music tells you. And no more really. .
Yeah, stop, yes. Okay, do from here. Here,
altitude.
Up.
Yes, it's many times more, more than that,
but anyway, you don't have to go on this
actually. Is this the other leg?
Yes, and turn, turn, up, open, open, down,
up. That's very quickly, up, up. and then
comes right away this one. This one and
knee, fall and And...
Just try it down, this time you're here,
and then you have either way, yes.
One time, then a jump again.
the outside leg is the outside leg always
into the middle
This is like over the music. The end, well
you know the music anyway. From where do
we play music?
From here? From the place where we were
just now, Matthias?
© BF-WATCH TV 2021
Shall we just like sing it, sing it, not
even mark it with the music from the
beginning?
Matthias?
But really, she's also red, right? Yes,
I'm red.
I'm making you one. Yes, yes, yes.
Okay. Okay. I don't know what I have to
do.
Thank you.
© BF-WATCH TV 2021 but also as a marking
device.
© BF-WATCH TV 2021
© BF-WATCH TV 2021 I don't know.
Thank you.
Actually, I didn't know how long it takes,
but I thought if we start something, we
have to kind of go through the whole
thing. It's terribly hard. It's really,
and I think they did fantastic. Actually,
I thought we'd do something else, but it's
almost the opposite, very light and very
nice, very funny, but I think it got too
late. I just wanted to do two very
different things, but it's already... It's
too warm down. Too warm down. Too warm
down. Too warm down. 1980. It's too short.
Isn't it too short?
I think they want to speak. It looks like
we only have three seats. So we'll have to
play musical chairs. But anyway, you have
to. We'll let you cool down. I think the,
the, the, otherwise I'll come back to it.
You should all put on something and drink
water. Yeah. Yeah. One chair? Yeah. Yeah,
why don't you bring out a couple more
chairs?
Pina, do you want to sit down here We can
start here.
As you can see, this is a, actually you're
participating, you're spectating in the
context of an improvised three-act play.
And this is the second act. And it's going
to be a divided act in the sense that the
first part of it will consist in a sort of
a fairly informal conversation between
myself and and Pina Bausch and hopefully
the dancers once they've recovered from
their efforts and then in the second half
I'm going to just open up the floor to a
general conversation so members of the
audience will be invited to ask their
questions and then the third act the
triumphal act will be where we feed you
out in the courtyard out here as a
conclusion of the event and it is meant as
a genuine third act in the sense that it
is participatory but it's participatory
not just in the gastronomical sense it's
your opportunity to actually meet with
with Peter Bausch herself with the dancers
who will be partaking of our repast with
us I thought as a kind of introduction to
our conversation I would ask you since the
Rite of Spring is a piece that has been a
long been a part of your career and it is
one of the central monuments in a sense in
the history of modern dance it's a piece
of music and the choreographies of which
have really marked the entire history of
modern dance and it's also a dance and a
piece of music that is so much built
around the polarity of dance as associated
with renewal on the one side with
resurgent life and on the other side with
with depth with expenditure I was just
curious as a sort of starting question ask
you what your personal relationship is to
this piece I mean in what sense it's a
piece that you've returned to in in the
course of your career as a dancer and a
choreographer. Anne McLean, You mean why
we are doing it again or something?
Actually, we keep a very big repertoire. I
do every day, every year a new work and we
have, we perform about 12, 14 different
evenings from the repertoire in a year.
And sometimes because of, I don't know for
certain because because of where we travel
or because a dancer is leaving or
something, so we lose a piece. And then
every year I try also to have one of the
old ones. But Sacre we always carry with
us the whole time. We always perform it
from time to time. So it was always there.
And so in a way it's also very healthy, I
think, for the company, the new ones.
Everybody everybody have to kind of go
through many different things. And the
other way, many people sometimes say, why
don't you do another Sacre? And I say, but
we do Sacre. It makes me also with each
new work, I have to open another door. So
if I keep my own works like if they are, I
have to always like go somewhere else.
What I think is very good to do. But in
the course of your performance of it, do
you alter the basic way way in which you
present the piece, the different aspects
of the choreography itself, or has it
remained relatively stable in the course
of the years? No, I try to do what I did
in the beginning. And the first
performance, it goes back to the mid-70s?
Yes, 76 or something, no? 77.
I haven't seen the original staging of it,
but in the ordinary staging, you were
referring to the fact that this is a real
floor, but you would ordinarily perform it
with loam or peat moss. Yeah, this is with
turf. I don't know, turf. And so it's a
completely different experience. I mean,
there are many, many dancers involved in
this piece, and the music is incredible.
It's incredible. It's so strong. It's
very, very energetic. This is just a
little bit from the end. But what I like
about the earth,
the talk, because the effect it has on the
body. First of all, also, it's completely
different to, it's all about the earth.
Also the starting, I mean, why they are
arriving there and all this. But also
because when they start sweating and
moving, so it sticks onto them. So when
they fall, they are everywhere full of
earth. So you should see them when they
are all after the, when they come for
buying, it's like they are all over with
earth and they look fantastic, I think.
It's interesting that you mention that
because in the piece that you've been you
were performing at Zellerbach, Nelken
carnations, the stage is covered with with
carnations with hundreds and hundreds of
fresh carnations and similarly they're not
fresh, they look fresh from the audience,
but in any case the sort of interaction
between the bodies and the support, this
natural support is a central feature of
the piece.
How did it first, the notion of using
these kinds of, they're not natural
landscapes obviously, but they're ways of
transforming the stage first arise in your
work?
Well of course when it's already, it's
usually a later moment when to think about
on what is the stage like. Because first
always only
when I know in what kind of direction this
piece will go, then it's only possible to
speak what could be. And me, myself, I
like very much the experience that you
have to pay an attention to something. So
it's always a different experience, you
know, like it's very sensual in a way.
Also we have a piece like, you come in the
opera house and the whole stage is, the
walls is grass, green grass. Or another
piece is water. And of course all this,
there are so many things, you know. With
the grass it's a different smell, it's
silence, there are sometimes mosquitoes
and little things. and it changes with
images it gets another it gets something
else so it can with certain things so it
is a grass change and and you look at the
grass completely different you look at the
grass new like in a place where it didn't
belong also all the experience and things
in water happen because of It's like a
mirror in a way. All the dresses are wet,
the clothes get heavy, they are freezing.
It makes certain music, it makes a lot of
noise. You can splash the water, you can
do all kinds of things with the water. And
it has so many different meanings too. And
so for me, all this together means a lot.
Not only the movement, but for me the
space, the music, the audience, also
everything I think I'd like to join
or something. Speaking of that, I mean
frequently, as was the case at Zellerbach
for instance, your company is performing
in fairly traditional window box type
stages. I mean stages where there's a
separation between audience and
performance space. That's a little bit
less true here where we're in a gymnasium
which essentially is used for athletic
events, but other kinds of events as well.
What I mean for you, what is an ideal
performance situation given exactly the
concept of spectacle that's inclusive that
you were just describing? I think it had
to do with where I was. I mean this was a
fantastic possibility and these pieces are
made also for being in a normal theater
because I mean it's even you know even to
put water on the stage it means for me I
like the water in the opera house. It's
already it means something so if you put
water somewhere else it's not the same but
in the opera house it's special. So it's
already, so I think it's already the
switch is, in this case, you know, I never
had the possibility to do different, but
not because, not only the possibilities,
but because we also, we are traveling a
lot, so it's for us also important, this
work, they need a certain space and a
certain size and possibilities,
If I would do a piece in a certain space,
that means it can't travel. It's also
complicated, you know. I was curious about
that because in a certain tradition of,
well in some of the cases that really the
founding, the inaugural cases in the
history of dance, particularly the strain
in dance theater that leads into
expression dance, dance, the notion of
outdoor performance was absolutely central
to the whole sense of dance's social
mission.
So your particular variation on having
grass in the opera house or water in the
opera house seems like a particularly
ironic twist. Sometimes we performed also
outdoor, of course, but this were also,
but there's is only with pieces possible
which are having nothing important what is
used from hanging or certain things and
also and it depends on the space. One
question I wanted to ask you that seems to
be a really striking feature of your the
way in which you construct scenes and your
different performances is the the emphasis
on bodies falling to the ground, the
contact between bodies and the ground. You
just mentioned in the case of your staging
of the Rite of Spring, the importance for
you that the bodies bear the trace of the
support on which they perform. Whereas so
much of classical ballet, and a great deal
of modern and contemporary dance focuses
so much on aerial effects. Is that
something that you do a lot of thinking
about it seems like such a strong current
in your work. I think this is in each work
is it's different it's very different but
I I think in in the Rite of Spring of
course I I feel it's it's very the the
music it's I think the music is telling me
that. You're just taking dictation. Yes in
that case yes I mean this is with Sacre
and also a few other pieces which when I
really saw this incredible strength and
this feeling what was in this music where
I felt I have something to do with. I
wanted very much to try to do. But other
works, they are not fixed. It s like I
take many different different musics and I
make a new work and that's completely
different then. And it depends also the
big influence on the dancers also, the
people which are in the company. It also
has an influence and also in which time we
are living. So it's not just doing a
choreography but I think being aware of
the feelings we are all having or what we
are knowing or all all these kind of
things, it all takes part.
And if what we had seen this evening was
instead of a rehearsal of a piece that
you've choreographed and represented many,
many times, if you were in the process of
developing a new piece, what would have
been different about what the audience
experienced tonight? I mean, this is also
quite unusual because usually we don't do
this. I mean, that I'm teaching this solo
to now all the dancers, this was like also
an exception, I must say.
Well, it's of course, what is very
different.
I mean, here you can still you feel what
is sacred. But in the other works, there
are so many little different stories
inside or thoughts or images or whatever,
what comes out of it. And each of the
dancers, each one is in a different way
important and also their certain
personality and the way how the influence
and also they each have their own dances,
their own different way of dancing and
choreography. So that's completely, it's
very complicated. I mean, it's just like
the best is to see it. That's always true.
But I guess what I was curious about is in
terms of your working method, when you're
developing a new piece, What's the degree
to which you have a fairly clear concept
of what the shape of a particular passage
should be versus what happens by accident,
by serendipity, by virtue, by dint of
improvisation? I think that is a very big
change from when I started the way how I
work now. In the beginning when I came
having this company in Bukhara, I always
tried to prepare everything, to be very
prepared and planned and thought
everything because I was scared. I was
afraid somebody asked me, what do we do?
And I said, I don't know. So I was
thinking of everything and then I never
come into this situation. I was terribly
scared to say or to speak about it because
for me, in one way I don't find the right
word. In another way, I always feel like
if I say something too important, I never
can reach what I say. I mean, it's better
I don't say nothing and hopefully
something arrives. you know.
But already in the beginning I felt
sometimes you know you work and certainly
something happened in the rehearsal, you
see something very little but has nothing
to do with what you have planned and you
don't know exactly why is it so important.
Why is it It's so important. Then you have
to think, I mean, you have to think what
you do. I mean, is this what you think,
why, what you like most certainly so much
and interest you, do you follow this or
you follow your plan? So what I did, I
followed always that. I left my plans
behind.
That is also very difficult.
You go somewhere where you don't know it
brings you. So in a way you have to just
trust it and actually we are there, the
company and me, and life is there. And now
what do we do? We speak about life, about
love, about everything what is important,
of course
in the beginning of the years I had I
judged some like I did if you gain you of
Taurus from look an opera and it like a
dance opera I did it just with dancers and
also offers in a really good I did blue
beard I did soccer and and the seven
deadly sins. But at the same time already
I did other works. I just things I like.
And because also, you see these pieces
which I was just telling you, that means
there is like a solo part in it. There is
a main figure. You know, if you give me
the or here you have, I mean there's
everybody in the choreography is very
important, but still there is this girl on
the end. It's the main part. and also in
Bluebeard, you have Bluebeard and Judith.
But then I had so many beautiful dancers.
They are all so different personalities
and so fantastic and each one very
different. So I wanted very much to create
something for them. So it started to be a
completely different work. And I think we
are speaking much more about in this work,
heroes in that way don't exist. It's just
like, it's talking about us. I mean, not
us personally, not private. I don't mean
this. And the way how to do this is of
course each choreographer has to find
their own way how to find, how to do this.
Because when there is no piece, is no
music, is no set, where do you start? You
have to find a kind of way, you know, like
I never did start from the beginning. I
start with question, like maybe sometimes
question I have to myself or other
question and because I know what I want
but I don't, has no shape, has no words.
So but how can I find, how can I shape it,
this what I really know what I'm looking
for because it's really, it's so clear
what I'm looking for but I couldn't say
it, you know. So I start
with many, many questions. And each one,
each member in the company, they have this
question, they sing, and then you think
you are not in a dance studio, they sit
and sing and do the pencil. And then each
one is doing something, or maybe not,
maybe they tell me tomorrow, or like like
this, and they can do some movement or
something that comes to their mind, or
talking or singing or whatever. And this I
do actually many, many, like for weeks,
and also bringing maybe other ideas into
it, but the questions are all around
something, kind of. But these These weeks
are just like making material or try to
find material because actually it will be
maybe 5% of what we are all doing maybe
will arrive in the work. So the final
process to when to start, I mean, it's
much, much later and also never from from
the beginning it's something so
complicated and so delicate when you try
to put two little things together. And
when you try that little bit with another
one, it's completely different. It means
something else. It feels something
different. And when you add a music even
too, it's so complicated and it's so rich
and it's endless and possibilities. So you
have to
Thank you.